---
title: Natural Numbers
author: nbloomf
---

We all developed an intuitive understanding of the counting numbers back in kindergarten. But what exactly are they? Mathematics depends on having precise definitions, and we need one for the natural numbers.

Typically, the natural numbers are developed using the *Peano axioms*: these axioms assert the existence of a set $N$ with an element 0 and a function $S : N \rightarrow N$ which satisfy the following.

1. $0 = S(n)$ does not have a solution $n \in N$.
2. If $S(n) = S(m)$, then $n = m$.
3. If $B$ is a set such that $0 \in B$ and whenever $n \in B$ we also have $S(n) \in B$, then in fact $N \subseteq B$.

There is another approach we can take, which as far as I know was introduced by William Lawvere. This approach characterizes the natural numbers explicitly as an initial object in an appropriate category. It turns out that thinking in this abstractly nonsensical fashion can be given a very concrete interpretation, essentially allowing us to derive executable **programs** and prove things about them.


## Iterative Sets

The basic setup of the Peano axioms -- the element 0 and the function $S$ -- form a kind of structure on $N$, which we give a name.

<div class="result">
<div class="defn">
<p>A set $A$ with a distinguished element $e$ and a distinguished function $\varphi : A \rightarrow A$ is called an *iterative set*.</p>
</div>
</div>

We can think of an iterative set as a very primitive kind of algebra. There's not much we can do with one, though, except construct a list of successive values: $$e, \quad \varphi(e), \quad \varphi(\varphi(e)), \quad \varphi(\varphi(\varphi(e))), \quad \ldots.$$ Not all of these successive values have to be distinct. For instance we can define a set $\bool = \{ \btrue, \bfalse \}$ and a function $\bnot : \bool \rightarrow \bool$ by $\bnot(\btrue) = \bfalse$ and $\bnot(\bfalse) = \btrue$. Now $(\bool, \btrue, \bnot)$ is an iterative set, but the sequence of values generated by $\bnot$ repeats: $$\btrue, \quad \bnot(\btrue) = \bfalse, \quad \bnot(\bnot(\btrue)) = \btrue, \quad \bnot(\bnot(\bnot(\btrue))) = \bfalse, \quad \ldots.$$

As a kind of algebra, the iterative sets come with a corresponding class of structure-preserving maps. In this case, the only structure to be preserved is the distinguished element and the distinguished function.

<div class="result">
<div class="defn">
<p>Suppose $(A,e,\varphi)$ and $(B,f,\psi)$ are iterative sets. A mapping $\theta : A \rightarrow B$ is called an *iterative homomorphism* if $\theta(e) = f$ and $\theta(\varphi(x)) = \psi(\theta(x))$ for all $x \in A$.</p>
</div>
</div>

It is straightforward to show that the identity function $\id$ is always an iterative homomorphism and that the composite of two homomorphisms is a homomorphism. So the iterative sets form a category (if you're into that).


## Natural Numbers

As an axiom, we define the natural numbers to be a special iterative set.

<div class="result">
<div class="axiom">
<p>There is a special inductive set $(\nats,\zero,\next)$ which has the following *universal property*: if $(A,e,\varphi)$ is an iterative set, then there is a unique iterative homomorphism $\Theta : \nats \rightarrow A$. This unique function $\Theta$ will be denoted $\natrec{e}{\varphi}$.</p>
</div>
</div>

At first this may seem like a strange definition. By repeatedly applying the $\next$ function to $\zero$, we get the successive values $$\zero, \quad \next(\zero), \quad \next(\next(\zero)), \quad \next(\next(\next(\zero))), \quad \ldots$$ which (assuming they are all distinct!) resemble the Peano numbers. But what sets $\nats$ apart from the other iterative sets is the special function $\natrec{\ast}{\ast}$: given any other iterative set $A$, there is **exactly one** iterative homomorphism from $\nats$ to $A$.

Applying this function to the sequence of elements above, we see that $\natrec{e}{\varphi}(\zero) = e$ (of course), and then $$\natrec{e}{\varphi}(\next(\zero)) = \varphi(\natrec{e}{\varphi}(\zero)) = \varphi(e),$$ $$\natrec{e}{\varphi}(\next(\next(\zero))) = \varphi(\natrec{e}{\varphi}(\next(\zero))) = \varphi(\varphi(e)),$$ $$\natrec{e}{\varphi}(\next(\next(\next(\zero)))) = \varphi(\natrec{e}{\varphi}(\next(\next(\zero)))) = \varphi(\varphi(\varphi(e))),$$ and so on.

The $\natrec{\ast}{\ast}$ function captures the basic pattern of *recursion* on the natural numbers, as we will see. Importantly, it does so in a well-behaved way; reasoning about recursive functions defined using $\natrec{\ast}{\ast}$ can be very easy.

We will eventually show that these natural numbers satisfy the more traditional Peano axioms, but we need a little more machinery first. In the meantime the following version of induction will come in handy.

<div class="result">
<div class="thm">
(Induction Principle.) Suppose $f : \nats \rightarrow A$ is a map and that $B \subseteq A$ is a subset such that $f(\zero) \in B$ and whenever $f(n) \in B$, we also have $f(\next(n)) \in B$. Then in fact $f(n) \in B$ for all natural numbers $n$.
</div>

<div class="proof">
Define a subset $T \subseteq \nats$ by $$T = \{n \in \nats \mid f(n) \in B \}.$$ By hypothesis, we have $\zero \in T$. Also, if $n \in T$, then $\next(n) \in T$; in particular, the restriction of $\next$ to $T$ is in fact a function $T \rightarrow T$. That is, $(T,\zero,\next)$ is an iterative set. Let $\Theta = \natrec{\zero}{\next}$ be the unique homomorphism $\nats \rightarrow T$.

Now let $\iota : T \rightarrow \nats$ denote the inclusion map; in fact $\iota$ is an iterative homomorphism, since we have $\iota(\zero) = \zero$ and $$\iota(\next(n)) = \next(n) = \next(\iota(n))$$ for all $n \in T$.

The composite map $\iota \circ \Theta : \nats \rightarrow \nats$ is again an iterative homomorphism, and by uniqueness, in fact we have $\iota \circ \Theta = \id$. If $n$ is a natural number, we have $$n = \id(n) = \iota(\Theta(n)) = \Theta(n),$$ and in particular, $n \in T$. That is, if $n$ is any natural number, we have $f(n) \in B$.
</div>
</div>

The traditional induction principle follows as a corollary where $A = \nats$ and $\varphi$ is the inclusion map.


## But Why?

As we'll see, the function $\natrec{\ast}{\ast}$ essentially characterizes the natural numbers just like the Peano axioms do, albeit in a slightly goofy and hard-to-get-used-to way. So if $\natrec{\ast}{\ast}$ and Peano are equivalent, why bother with the added abstraction? Well, if we define our arithmetic purely in terms of $\natrec{\ast}{\ast}$, and then find a concrete representation of $\natrec{\ast}{\ast}$ in software, then suddenly all of our proofs become executable. And by wrapping up recursion behind a small number of "recursion patterns", those proofs can be easier to find and reason about.
